As a designer, you live and breathe the visual, right?
You craft every single pixel, every color, every bit
of layout to create this perfect experience.
But what if I told you
that every design you make has a secret identity,
a second life that millions of people experience not
with their eyes, but with their ears.
It's time we uncovered what your designs really sound like.
So that's the big question for today.
What does your design sound like?
And once you get the answer,
you're gonna gain this new kind of superpower.
The ability to actually hear your own designs
and make sure they work for absolutely everyone.
Okay, so here's the big reveal.
Running parallel to your beautiful pixel,
perfect visual design.
There's a whole other interface.
It's a hidden one, a structural one.
You can't see it, but it is absolutely essential
for anyone using assistive technology.
That's right. Things like screen readers,
they don't process your visual styling,
they don't care about your brand colors
or that elegant white space you spent hours on.
Nope. They interact
with a totally different layer of information.
One that's all about structure and meaning.
Now, I know this might sound a little technical,
but I promise you it's not.
The way your designs meaning gets translated into sound is
actually a pretty straightforward process.
Let's just quickly walk through how it all happens.
It all starts with you, right?
Inside your design file, your choices,
the components you use, the little notes you leave
for engineers, that's the blueprint.
From there, engineering brings it all to life.
And as they do a sort of simplified map
of your design gets created automatically,
and that map is what gets turned into sound.
And that simplified map, it has a name,
the accessibility tree.
The best way to think of it is like this.
Your full design is like a massive,
complex architectural blueprint.
The accessibility tree, on the other hand,
is more like the simple directory in a building's lobby.
It doesn't show you the plumbing
or the wiring, it just tells you where
to find the important stuff, you know,
like the buttons and the headings.
So how does this building directory describe everything?
Well, it uses a really simple language
that's built on just four core properties.
Once you know these four things,
you can basically understand
what any element in your design is gonna sound like.
These are the magic four name, role, state, and value.
So the role is just its type,
is it a button, a heading, a link.
You actually define this just
by choosing the right component.
The name is simply what it's called, like submit
or profile settings.
You specify that in your annotations.
The state tells us its current condition. Is it disabled?
Is it checked, expanded?
And again, your annotations define this.
And finally, value, which is really
for things like sliders or
Text fields.
So here's how that all comes together.
A screen reader, user doesn't just hear submit.
They hear the full picture submit form.
That's the name button.
That's the role disabled, and that's its current state.
See, it's clear, it's unambiguous,
and it's super useful, all
because those three properties were defined correctly.
Okay, so now you know the language of this hidden interface.
You can start using your new power.
You can literally look at a visual design and spot problems
before anyone even writes a single line of code.
Let's start with a really important concept.
You gotta know that there are two main ways
to navigate a screen non visually.
The first is the reading order.
This is like reading a book, you know, top to bottom.
A screen reader announces everything in sequence, headings,
buttons, paragraphs, the works,
but the focus order is different.
That's for keyboard users who use the tab key to jump only
between the interactive things like
buttons and input fields.
You've gotta consider both of these paths
to make sure the experience is logical.
And once you have this knowledge,
all these common issues just start to jump out at you.
You'll see three learn more buttons
and immediately realize they'll all sound identical.
You'll spot that beautiful little trash can icon
and think, wait, what's its name?
You'll see an accordion that looks open
and question if its expanded state
is actually being announced.
You see, you're already starting
to think like a human screen reader.
Let's just look at this classic example.
Visually, you see three open buttons
and they're next to different items.
So the context is totally clear to you.
But a screen reader user who's just tabbing between buttons,
they just hear open button, then open button
and open button, open what they have no clue.
This is a problem you can now easily spot
and fix with better annotations.
And this brings us to a really important shift in
how you think about your job.
You are not just a visual designer anymore.
You are the architect of the oral experience,
the sound of your interface.
That's your responsibility now, and it's a really creative
and empowering one.
So here's the crucial point.
What you specify is what users will hear.
Engineering teams are amazing, but they're not mind readers.
If the accessible name or the heading level
or a state change isn't in your design spec,
it just won't be in the final product.
Your annotations are the direct source of truth for
that oral experience.
So what should be in your handoff?
Here's a quick little checklist to get you started.
First, make sure every interactive element has a
clear accessible name.
Define your heading levels
to create a logical outline for the page.
Document all the state changes like when an accordion
expands or a checkbox gets checked.
And for images, make the call.
Are they just decorative and can be ignored?
Or are they informative and need a description?
And you wanna hear the best part? You don't have
to just cross your fingers
and trust that your annotations were implemented correctly.
You can actually peek under the hood
and check the accessibility tree yourself right in your web
browser without writing
or even reading a single line of code.
It is surprisingly simple In any major browser,
you can open the developer tools,
and I know developer tools sounds intimidating,
but stick with me and just find the accessibility tab.
From there, you can click on any element on the page
and see its properties, its name, its role,
and its state. You can literally
Check if what was built matches your design spec.
This is a total game changer for designers.
So let's end where we started.
You now have the power to be the human screen reader.
You can look at any interface yours, someone else's,
and see its secret identity.
From this moment on as you're designing, always ask yourself
that one simple, powerful question.
What will this sound like?
Answering it is going to make you a better, more inclusive,
and honestly, a more powerful designer.